
From an exchangeability perspective the key decisionmakers in an economic system are the firm and the individual. Each is a collection of stochastic contracts. The stochastic contract is governed by a birth-and-death process. This view of the economy is compatible with both the rational and behavioral approaches to economics. The stability of economic behavior (Lucas) resides in the institutions, customs, and routines that govern civilized behavior. This stability is based on Simon's modular, evolutionary principle and is compatible with Arrow's heterogeneity and martingale requirements. Computability is common to the three views. Lucas' contracts must be computable and both Arrow and Simon demand computable decisions. \({ }^{14}\)

In this subjective, de Finetti system there is no unconditional business cycle - each individual, firm, and industry has its own set of sample paths. Fluctuations are rainbow phenomena, conditional on the history of the observer.

Stability emerges when critical economic properties are found to be invariant to normal fluctuations. Heterogeneity and stability work together. For example, the insurance company partitions customers so that the SLLN can be applied to each partition. Behavior is then predictable and the premiums charged allow the insurance company to survive.

This general theory of partitions explains the formation of other economic institutions whose range encompasses the street gang and the prestigious club. \({ }^{15}\) A vibrant healthy society is composed of segmented groups with permeable boundaries. When the partitions become rigid and constrain individual mobility the society stultifies. It is absolutely essential that all of these segmented groups be embedded in the larger societal network. The institutions that bind society's members must in some vague, but essential sense dominate the bounds that satisfy the instinctual urge to belong to a segmented group. This is achieved by conditional independence and the corresponding conditional expectation and conditional martingale. They split and then project from the larger space into the smaller spaces with conditional martingales preserving the 'conservation of fairness' across partitions.

The equilibrium concept associated with the exchangeable, economic process is based on the 'no-arbitrage principle - a martingale. An economy abiding by this principle is automatically 'efficient' and 'fair'. \({ }^{16}\)

