# Epigraph 

> *There has been a tremendous neglect of the notion of ... emergent choice; that we don't really have before us objects among which to choose. We create them in the act of choice...* **Arbitrage really has not become central to economics like it should be.** -- James M. Buchanan


# Introduction 

We strongly agree with Nobel laureate James M. Buchanan: arbitrage has not become central to economics as it should be. This paper is fundamentally about arbitrage. At the intellectual level we deliver a literal triangular arbitrage by examining and combining three separate research programs unified by a single underlying principle --- the intellectual strategy and the object of study turn out to be the same thing: arbitrage. We call this *arbitrage trinitarianism*. The Journal of Economic Perspectives describes its own scholarly mission as providing "intellectual arbitrage" for economists. We propose that our project is of inherent interest to readers of JEP.

In his 1979 book on economic methodology titled "What Should Economists Do?", Buchanan states unambiguously and provocatively:

> **"Economics is about arbitrage.** *The behavioral paradigm central to economics is that of the trader whose Smithean propensity to truck and barter locates and creates opportunities for mutual gains. This paradigm is contrasted with that of the maximizing engineer who allocates scarce resources among alternatives.... the maximization paradigm is the fatal methodological flaw in modern economics."*

Austrian catallactics, Bruno de Finetti's operational subjective probability theory, and modern finance each independently are founded upon the arbitrage principle. But these foundations were developed in isolation of each other --- they have not properly recognized each other as kindred. This is not a mere academic coincidence. It is an intellectual convergence to be exploited. A synoptic reading of each literature reveals deep connections and opportunities for profound insight. This is arbitrage trinitarianism: the unification of three separate literatures and the new insights that emerge from their combination that none could achieve alone. This is not a literature survey; it is a genuinely deep intellectual triangular arbitrage — one that motivates the development of a new economic methodology. This is computational statistical catallactics --- a new methodology that makes the unified framework empirically operational.


# Arbitrage Trinitarianism

To repeat our premise, there are three areas in economics in which arbitrage plays a foundational role: Austrian catallatics, de Finetti's operational subjective probability theory, and financial economics. This is the arbitrage trinity.

With @Arthur2023 we "believe the Austrian approach deserves a more central place in economic theory." But rather than praise the Austrians and then just as quickly move past them, we intend to build directly upon Austrian price theory. Economic calculation is the fundamental contribution of Austrian economics [see @Boettke1998, @HorwitzRAE2004, and @VaughnEI1980]. The main point of the Mises-Hayek argument in the socialist calculation debate  was that entrepreneurial economic calculation was operational while socialist planning simply was not. Full stop. As Kirzner points out: "My understanding of the Misesian view of the entrepreneur and of its similarity to my own can be expressed by characterizing the Misesian view of profit as well as my own as an *arbitrage* theory of profit." Austrian economics insists that we must not obscure the main object of scientific interest: *entrepreneurial economic calculation*. Arbitrage is the driving force of the catallaxy. A catallaxy is a spontaneous order that emerges from voluntary exchange between individuals pursuing their own ends, whereas an economy implies a managed or organized system directed toward collective goals. Austrian catallactics provides the proper microfoundations for the study of market processes. And the Austrians have stood alone wisely and stoically in their understanding and articulation of the market as an economic process. It is upon this foundation that we must build.

Bruno de Finetti's operational subjective probability theory is founded upon the Dutch book argument (DBA) [see @Standford2026]. A the heart of the DBA is the logic of arbitrage. In fact, it is a theorem at the individual level of *no-arbitrage*. This is the proper place for the concept of no-arbitrage. The DBA defines individual rational behavior as a coherent plan. We emphasize that de Finetti's is an economic derivation of the axioms of probability and inthis regard is entirely unique. De Finetti was as thoroughgoingly subjectivist as any Austrian economist. His concerns with epistemology and subjective knowledge are identical to those of @Hayek1948. With @Kreps1988 we agree that his representation theorem is *the* fundamental theorem of operational statistics. Remarkably, his *Fundamental Theorem of Prevision* is identical to the *Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing* [See @Nau1999, @NauMcCardleTD1991, @NauTD2001, @Nau2025, and @SchervishSiedenfeldKadaneIJAR2008]. De Finetti uniquely provides the subjective probability foundations for an operational theory of arbitrage as the driving force of the catallaxy.

Perhaps not surprisingly, modern finace is the third pillar of the arbitrage trinity. As @FiglewskiJFM2017 has said, "Arbitrage, or more precisely, the lack of profitable arbitrage opportunities, is what drives our pricing models. Derivatives theory is based on the principle that when the same payoff can be produced in two or more different ways in the market, arbitrage (true arbitrage!) must force them all to be priced exactly the same." @RossAER1987 has very usefully (for our purposes) distinguished between the *intuition* of modern finance and the *theory* of modern finance. According to Ross, and we agree: "The theory is less a formal mathematical structure driven by its own imperatives --- although that is always a danger --- as it is a handmaiden that attempts to bridge the gap between the intuitions and the data." Furthermore we agree with @DibvigRoss1994 that "... the intuition of that the absence of arbitrage is more primitive than equilibrium, since only relatively few rational agents are needed to bid away arbitrage opportunities, even in the presence of a sea of agents driven by 'animal spirits.'" Modern finance theory has been the one place where arbitrage theory has been most thoroughly worked out, though not without some ambiguity and confusion (as we will demonstrate). Nevertheless, there is much to learn from the formal methods of finance theory that will be of great service to computational statistical catallactics. We conclude with @FamaAER2014 that "finance is the most successful branch of economics in terms of rich theory, extensive empirical tests, and penetration of the theory and evidence into other areas of economics and real-world applications." Though our explicit purpose is to replace the microfoundations of finance built upon Arrow-Debreu and rational expectations with those of Mises, Hayek, and de Finetti we nevertheless aspire to the same impressive combinations of powerful theory and empirical predictive ability as modern finance. Indeed, as we will show the success of the latter has always been due to a latent theory of catallactics and operationally subjective probability theory a la de Finetti. 

The synthetis of these three arbitrage pillars is potent. 

